---
date: 2023-03-19T18:57:42Z
lastmod: 2024-01-13T15:03:17Z
title: Chevere 3.0
tags:
    - php
    - chevere
author: rodber
summary: Chévere! chévere! chévere!
image: /org/chevere/packages/chevere/chevere-social-3.0.png
---

> This content as 2024-01-13 is outdated due Chevere 4.0.

[Chevere](https://chevere.org) keeps getting better with a broader type support (generics) allowing to achieve the unicorn concept of typed array for PHP.

It has been three months since [Chevere 2.0](https://rodolfoberrios.com/2022/12/13/chevere-2-0/) and this new major version happened that fast because of a new major client using Chevere. From December 2022 I'm involved in the creation of a new state of the art system for the agricultural industry and I'm glad that I got the chance to implement Chevere there.

I hope this trend continues, that Chevere gets used in more different contexts and use cases.

## Generics

Chevere is getting support for generic [parameters](https://chevere.org/packages/parameter) which provides great utility for I/O layer validation. With support for generics we can now handle complex real-life data structures.

If you want to assert on a fixed array argument is trivial as define its key-parameter pair:

```php
$parameter = arrayp(
    abc: integerp(minimum: 100)
);
$argument = ['abc' => 100];
assertArgument($parameter, $argument);
```

For the example above Chevere will check for `abc` value to be at least `100`.

Chevere gets more interesting when wanting to assert a collection of `n-items`. In Chevere this is easy as define both generic key `K` and value `V`:

```php
$parameter = genericp(
    K: stringp('/^[a-z]+$/'),
    V: integerp(minimum: 100)
);
$argument = [
    ['a' => 100],
    ['b' => 101],
    ['c' => 102],
    // ...
];
```

For the previous code Chevere will check on both key and value pairs on the entire array, for each pair. Key will be match against a string with defined regular expression.

Cherry on top? 🤯 Chevere supports **nested generic** definitions. You can validate a generic *inside* a generic.

## Union parameter

The newly added [Union Parameter](https://chevere.org/packages/parameter#union) enables to define a parameter of [type union](https://php.watch/versions/8.0/union-types). With this you can assert a parameter against multiple types which makes Chevere's type system more robust.

With Chevere 3 you can assert any argument against an union parameter:

```php
$parameter = unionp(
    stringp('/^[a-z]+$/'),
    integerp(minimum: 1),
    nullp(),
    // ...
);
assertArgument($parameter, 'abc');
assertArgument($parameter, 1);
assertArgument($parameter, null);
```

Chevere's union parameter system is powerful and more flexible than PHP's built-in union type. It supports multiple parameters with their own specific rules. With Chevere you can build union parameter rules that you can't have in plain PHP.

## Null parameter

The newly added [Null Parameter](https://chevere.org/packages/parameter#null) enables to define a parameter of type null. This was added to be used with [union parameter](#union-parameter) as on its own to define a null parameter doesn't make much sense.

## Action improves

With the addition of generics the [Action](https://chevere.org/packages/action) component got modified for consistency. I dropped the concept of "Parameters" (plural) in favor of a newly introduced type: `ArrayTypeParameterInterface`, which is implemented by `ArrayParameter` and `GenericParameter`.

To summarize, I went from this:

```php
public function getResponseParameters(): ParametersInterface
{
    return parameters(
        id:     integerParameter(),
        name:   stringParameter(),
    );
}

public function run(): array
{
    return [
        'id'   => 1,
        'name' => 'rodolfo'
    ];
}
```

To this (fixed array):

```php
public function acceptResponse(): ArrayTypeParameterInterface
{
    return arrayp(
        id:     integerp(),
        name:   stringp(),
    );
}
```

And to this (generic array):

```php
public function acceptResponse(): ArrayTypeParameterInterface
{
    return genericp(
        arrayp(
            id:     integerp(),
            name:   stringp(),
        ),
}

public function run(): array
{
    return [
        [
            'id'   => 1,
            'name' => 'Argentina'
        ],
        [
            'id'   => 2,
            'name' => 'France'
        ],
        // ...
    ];
}
```

## HTTP controller improves

The [HttpController](https://chevere.org/packages/http#controller) component gets improved with own namespace and interface improvements for consistency. For example, I changed `withGet` to `withQuery` and `withPost` for `withBody`.

You can review [issue #120](https://github.com/chevere/chevere/issues/120) for an overview of these changes.
